hi this is me doing the dishes I dread
bringing myself to do this task but when
I'm in the act of doing the dishes it
isn't so bad as the anticipation
creating order out of chaos is a part of
living in a conscientious manner and
conscientiousness is a personality trait
that can be subdivided into orderliness
and industriousness and is a predictor
of long-term success in this video I'll
share some insights on how to increase
it in order to be more productive
organized and determined so I recently
made a video about becoming a bloomer in
which I touched upon the subject
conscientiousness and a person in the
comment section named Shadow Man asked
me to do a video about how to increase
your conscientiousness and I thought
that would be a great idea before we go
into the how let's start finding out
what conscientiousness is and create
some context the trait conscientiousness
can be subdivided into two aspects
industriousness and orderliness these
two aspects facilitate and support each
other in other words you're likely to be
more industrious when you're orderly and
you're likely to be orderly when you're
industrious conscientious people are
often planners they like structure they
are disciplined if their lives sorted
out they are basically the ones that a
formerly disorganized person like myself
perceives as superhuman machines highly
conscientious people love hierarchies
they'll probably prefer living in
bondage in a well-organized Galactic
Empire over living in freedom on the
chaotic planet of tatooine conscientious
people aren't always the most fun people
to be with they're orderliness comes
with an increased disgust sensitivity
not just disgust for chaos but also for
people at the bottom of the hierarchy
and their miserable fate is a motivator
for them to stay away from the bottom
this disgust sensitivity may be at the
expense of compassion they are most
likely judgmental towards others they
can't stand others being so lazy and not
taking responsibility and they have low
tolerance for
people violating norms and rules however
they are also very judgmental towards
themselves not functioning properly
themselves fills them with shame and
guilt that's why they are more prone to
the fear of failing so non conscientious
people may have a higher tolerance for
chaos this is also why they don't
succeed in life I've already told you
that a personality test indicated that
I'm high an openness and high in
neuroticism being high in openness means
being high in creativity but also the
risk of emotional instability
long story short to reduce neuroticism
and turn its creativity into
productivity i had to increase my
conscientiousness and to believe me this
is a very difficult thing to do for
someone who has lived in chaos for so
many years increasing conscientiousness
doesn't mean that we become
conscientious people we can still remain
the creative open and compassionate
people we are it just means that we
adopt certain behaviors that
conscientious people have to get a
better grip on our lives look despite
the fact there are extremely talented
people among us without some form of
structure chances are small that they
will ever capitalize on those talents
for example someone who is high in
extraversion and high in openness will
most likely be a social butterfly I love
these people because there are a lot of
fun to be around a problem is though
that they like socializing so much with
so many different people and in so many
different places that they will move
through life without any direction if
people like these would just pick a
direction and stick to that direction
they would be unstoppable like a North
Korean short-range ballistic missile
although that may be a bad example but
they could structure their lives in a
way that their goal the star in the sky
stays visible at all times and
illuminates the path to reach that goal
instead of changing goals and ambitions
every two weeks it also helps them to
weed out the excesses of the lively
social existence and form a small group
of good friends that assist them in
their journey for me something simple
like keeping my house clean is one of
the best things I can do for myself at
the same time it's also one of the
toughest things to stay committed to I
would rather write and make YouTube
videos all day but when I neglect my
living environment anxiety slowly starts
to slip in and eventually I will lose my
ability to steadily engage in my
creative activities so let's get
practical now again conscientiousness
can be subdivided in orderliness and
industriousness let's start with
orderliness when I create order out of
chaos I look at life in three different
areas one my outside world - my ego
extensions and three my mind now as you
may know the Stoics make a clear
distinction between the things that are
inner control any things that are not in
our control the good news is that
sorting ourselves out is inner control
the bad news is that the outside world
is not in our control so we have to make
a compromise within permanence and know
that despite directions we don't control
the outcome that said creating order in
our surroundings will make our lives at
least a bit more predictable and that's
what we're aiming for it doesn't mean
that we should take control of
everything outside us but create order
among the aspects of our lives we
correspond with these are for example
finances relationships with people a job
or an education by sorting out these
things we create an overview of our
relationship with our environment what
needs to be cultivated and what needs to
be cut loose just creating a financial
overview knowing my exact
expenses every month gives me a lot of
peace of mind the second one are the ego
extensions Carl Jung argued that we have
aspects in our lives that we are tied to
in a way that they've become extensions
of ourselves this could be a living
environment like an apartment or dorm
room but it could also be a partner
because ego extensions are part of
ourselves it's important that they are
as structured as possible cleaning our
room basically means cleaning ourselves
and when our room is dirty we ourselves
are dirty as well also the act of
cleaning has a calming effect on our
minds and I would say it's an underrated
form of meditation the last one is the
mind how do we keep order in our mind
well partly by sorting out our
surroundings and ego extensions and
partly by going inwards training the
mind has been a practice for thousands
of years across many cultures and
religions the key is to keep our minds
in the present moment and let go of
worry and rumination spiritual teacher
Eckhart Tolle wrote a book on how to do
this named the power of now
and I've put a link in the description
when our minds are calm we can focus
more easily on tasks and get things done
which is the next aspect of
conscientiousness industriousness
industriousness and orderliness are tied
to each other it takes some work to be
orderly and order facilitates work at
the same time my personal preference is
creating order first and be industrious
in regards to my creative pursuits later
simply because I'm more productive when
my surroundings are cleaned up so after
I've sorted out my finances and my
apartment and my mind is relatively calm
it's time to get creative and above all
productive the number one success factor
when it comes to productivity can be
summarized in one word discipline
discipline is the act of doing the same
things over and over again let's say
that for example your goal is writing a
book writing a book doesn't happen over
we need to divide this task in smaller
pieces let's say writing 2,000 words in
one short session if we repeat this
session over and over again after 50
sessions we have written a hundred
thousand words when we focus on small
tasks no task is too big every night
before I go to sleep I write down my
goals for the next day this could be
something like writing a video script
doing the laundry working out a certain
muscle group in the gym anything I can
do on that very day an important factor
in regards to discipline is trust we
have to trust that by doing something
repeatedly the results will come we can
apply this to almost everything body
building losing weight building a
YouTube audience and also the practice
of meditation breath meditation for
example is the act of watching our
breath and our thoughts and when we lose
ourselves in our thoughts we bring our
attention back to the breath doing this
again and again slowly increases our
overall awareness so after setting a
goal we divide this goal and sub goals
and create subtasks from them and
execute these subtasks with our full
attention when we don't respect a small
we don't deserve the big and like famous
philosopher Lao Tzu once wrote a journey
of a thousand miles begins with one step
by increasing our conscientiousness we
tether our wild and reckless selves to a
framework to gain overview and direction
in our lives this might feel like
bondage at first but after a while we
begin to enjoy the peace and tranquility
that comes with it by all means it's not
an easy task I have fallen off the
bandwagon many times and I still do some
days are extremely productive other days
are not but as long as we keep pursuing
order and keep doing the things we need
to do in order to make our lives
slightly better we are making progress
thank you for watching
[Music]